{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2759
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;\red56\green101\blue115;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0\c84706;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c27451\c47059\c52549;
}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww28600\viewh18000\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 April 26, 2024\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 STT \'96 411 \'96 001\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 Dr. Lee\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 Final Project Report\'a0
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 Group 5 - Leo Doak, Cole Thibault, Darina Aynaeva\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi960\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 With our experiment, we built paper helicopters of varying sizes and weights to see how long they could stay in the air being dropped from a consistent height. This experiment was done with the goal of obtaining data on how fast the helicopters would drop to the ground depending on the size so that we could draw conclusions from that.\'a0
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 The experiment was initially done with one main factor and one blocking variable, but then later a second main factor was added to obtain more comprehensive data. The main factors that were used were the size of paper clip attached to the bottom of the paper helicopter and the size of the helicopter itself. These factors were chosen as both impact weight of the helicopter which we thought would mean that with a heavier helicopter, it would spin a lot more, delaying its time to hit the ground. The size of paper clip was divided between no paper clip, small and large paper clip. The size of the helicopter had 2 variations, that being tiny and large helicopter. The blocking variable we chose was the person dropping the helicopter. We chose this as our blocking variable mainly because while we think that whichever researcher is dropping the helicopter could impact the data an amount, we do not really care what the difference in time between each researcher is, as that specific data is not related to our goal. We do believe that each of these factors will influence the time till the helicopter hits the ground and we should find a significant difference.\'a0
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs32 The way we collected data was that we would divide our 3 team members into a recorder, a dropper, and a timer. The dropper would be the person who was dropping the paper helicopter to see how fast it would go from the same height as everyone else, the timer was the person who used a stopwatch to record the time that helicopter left the dropper\'92s hands until it hit the ground, and the recorder was the person who recorded the time\'92s into our spreadsheet. These roles were exchanged between team members depending on whose turn it was to drop the paper helicopter. Time was recorded in seconds, and we ran 90 trials, 30 for each person, 45 for each type of helicopter and 30 for each size of paper clip.\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs32 \cf2 Analysis: (evaluation of assumption, transformation of data and the reason behind it, anov, multiple comparison method (interaction plots, tukey test)\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f3\b\fs32 \cf2 Analysis:\'a0
\f2\b0 \'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs32 \cf2 The initial analysis of variance indicated to us that the helicopter size could be a significant factor and that person is also very close to being significant, so close, that it was definitely worth checking out. Helicopter size factor has a p-value of 8.47e-09 and person has a p-value of 0.0502. When looking at the normality plots, the data appears to be normally distributed. The residual versus fitted looks good with the residual line being centered around 0.0 and not a lot of variation. The Q-Q residuals looks mostly fine with the data points being somewhat scattered but mostly centered around the linear line. The scale location versus square root of standardized residuals looks worrying as the data points don\'92t appear to be centered and the red line indicator is not flat at all but has increases and decreases. The constant leverage, residuals versus factor levels looks fine and appears that the variance for each factor is normal except for a slight increase towards the tail end of Leo\'92s data.\'a0 The data passes the Anderson darling with a p-value of 0.604, which would indicate that our data is normally distributed.\'a0 When we do the bartlett\'92s test for homogeneity of variances, the p-value for factor person is 0.04604. This would mean that we reject the null hypothesis and say that the variances are different for each factor. The other factors for type of paper clip, and helicopter size, have a p-value of 0.5477, and 0.21 respectively. So, we can say that type of paper clip and helicopter size do appear to have a similar variance for each of the different factors. Since one of the bartlett test\'92s failed, it would make sense to transform our data. We could then recheck our test and make sure that everything passes.\'a0
\f1\fs24 \

\f2\fs32 After transforming the data, we checked the normality plots again and found that they look slightly better, the residual versus fitted looks slightly better with the data points being more centered. The Q-Q residuals versus standardized residuals look better with the data points being closer to the linear line and less of the points stray from the other points. The scale-location looks slightly better with the increases and decreases of the fitted red line being not as severe as previously seen in the non-transformed data\'92s plot.\'a0 For the constant leverage, Residuals versus Factor levels instead of person being used as the factors as in the previous non transformed data\'92s plot, it's now using the helicopter size and this plot looks a lot better, where the fitted red line is flatter, and the data points appear to be more centered. This would lead us to believe that out now transformed data is normally distributed and the variance of each if the factors is equivalent.\'a0 This would also lead us to believe that the data will pass the Anderson darling and bartlett test. The Anderson darling test passes with a 0.524, which means that we fail to reject the null hypothesis and say that the data is normally distributed. The bartlett test passes for all the different factors. The Bartlett test for person has a p-value of 0.07, the bartlett test for type of a paper clip has a p-value of 0.4034, and the bartlett test for helicopter size is 0.8694. All these p-values are greater than 0.05 which means that we fail to reject the null hypothesis and can say that the variance of the factors is similar.\'a0\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi960\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs32 \cf2 Now that we have confirmed that our data is correctly set up, we can move onto our actual data analysis, we start off with analysis of variance. The p-value for helicopter size is 8.15e-09, the p-value for type of paper clip is 0.7562, and the p-value for person is 0.0769. This would lead us to say that helicopter size is a significant factor in predicting time in the air of the helicopter. We would also then say that type of paper clip and person is not a significant factor in predicting the time in the air of the helicopter. After running the Tukey test, we can see that the only significant difference in means is between large and tiny for helicopter size factor. Every other comparison for type of paperclip and person had a p-value greater than 0.05, therefore not a significant difference in mean. With making the interaction plots, there are 3 different interaction plots between the 3 factors. The plots are \'93Interaction Plot of Person and Type of Paper clip\'94, \'93Interaction Plot of Type of Paper clip and Helicopter Size\'94, and \'93Interaction Plot of Type of Person and Helicopter Size\'94. For the first interaction plot that shows the interaction of Person and Type of Paper clip, this show us that each one of persons got entirely different values for each kind of factor combination, Leo\'92s values are evenly spaced but lower than the rest, Coles are evenly spaces but higher than Leo, and Darina are situated between Cole and Leo but got the same results for none and big paperclip. Some more interesting things from this is that the paper clip size did not do the same things for each person. Cole\'92s longest time was with the big paper clip while Darina got the same value for none and big and Leo got the longest time with the small paper clip and the shortest with the big paper clip. The exact opposite of what Cole got. Then for the next plot of \'93Interaction Plot of Type of Paper clip and Helicopter Size\'94, the lines are very nearly flat. This further proves the initial statement from the analysis of variance that paper clip is not significant, if it was significant then we would see some sort of linear positive or negative line for the interaction between paper clip and helicopter size. For the third plot , \'93Interaction Plot of Type of Person and Helicopter Size\'94, there seems to be a negative interaction, which doesn\'92t make much sense as the lines should be flat. It is very evident why we had to transform our data. Then I flipped around the variables to test if I could see any other interactions, the plots then created were \'93Interaction plot of Type of Paper clip and Person\'94, \'93Interaction Plot of Helicopter Size and Type of Paper Clip\'94, and \'93Interaction Plot of Helicopter Size and person\'94. Seems to be interacting factors in all the plots. The type of paper clip and person plot does not have any linear line, meaning that there may be an interaction, but it would take more research to figure out how. For the interaction Plot of Helicopter Size and Type of Paper Clip, the lines are negatively linear which makes sense as we already learned that type of paper clip does not really influence the helicopter time in air. This plot looks very similar to the \'93Interaction Plot of Helicopter Size and Person\'94, which further proves our previous point that helicopter size seems to be the most prominent significant factor in determining time spent in air.\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f3\b\fs32 \cf2 Analysis Conclusion:\'a0
\f2\b0 \'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi960\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs32 \cf2 The ANOVA tests for randomized block design showed that helicopter size was the only significant factor in determining airtime in seconds. Paper clips size produced no remarkable results. In fact, all three researchers produced varied results. Our blocking variable, person, initially failed the bartlett test. This indicated a need to transform data and run interaction plots. While still having a high low p-value, the transformed data improved the Bartlett Test and allowed us to produce ANOVA results. With these results we conclude that, while not statistically significant, it is highly suggestive that the blocking variable person did influence the results that were obtained. We also conclude that helicopter size is statistically significant in how long it takes a paper helicopter to reach the ground from a drop height of four feet.\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f3\b\fs32 \cf2 Discussion of Problems Encountered:\'a0
\f2\b0 \'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi960\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs32 \cf2 Human error was the biggest problem encountered. It does make sense as each group member might have made their helicopter slightly different, each person might drop the helicopter slightly different as well. Another factor is that the person keeping track of the time changed for some of the trials. The person holding the stopwatch was Leo for Darina and Cole, but for Leo, Cole was the stopwatch. Each person might stop and start at different times or have better/worse reaction times.\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f3\b\fs32 \cf2 Recommendations:\'a0
\f2\b0 \'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi960\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs32 \cf2 \strokec3 There are several recommendations that could be used to improve this experiment. Due to time constraints, the helicopters were all dropped from a four-foot distance. This limited variation in time (seconds). To determine if there is greater variation between helicopter size and paper clip size, we would have to increase the drop point's height. The paper clip size was not as effective in increasing or decreasing the amount of time it took the helicopter to stay in the air. Adding more paper clips or increasing the weight in a different way may help with this problem. To really simulate this experiment would be to accurately cut the helicopter, have a robot drop them so human error can be avoided.\'a0 Also record each drop with a camera, to accurately be able to see when the helicopter touches the ground.\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f3\b\fs32 \cf2 Credits:
\f2\b0 \'a0\uc0\u8232 There were three researchers who participated in this experiment: Darina Aynaeva, Leo Doak, and Cole Thibault. All researchers folded and dropped their own helicopters, taking turns recording data and timing a different member\'92s drop. The R code was run by Leo Doak with assistance from the templates provided by Dr. Jeonghwa Lee. The Final report and presentation were split between the three researchers.\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs32 \cf2 Appendix:\'a0\'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://uncw4-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/lcd4211_uncw_edu/EX9tujttVExBna89PdcWW5cB0l1XA6gUWxs54YrBOoi2NA?e=4kfyBh"}}{\fldrslt 
\f4\i\fs32 \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 R-Code}}
\f2\fs32 \'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0

\f4\i\fs32 \cf2 Data:
\f2\i0 \'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://uncw4-my.sharepoint.com/personal/da2811_uncw_edu/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7B2A657FE4-861E-4CB4-87BE-E6028B596CB6%7D&file=STT411%20Helicoptor%20Project.xlsx&action=default&mobileredirect=true"}}{\fldrslt 
\f4\i\fs32 \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 STT411 Helicoptor Project.xlsx}}
\f2\fs32 \'a0
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa213\qj\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://uncw4-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/lcd4211_uncw_edu/EeO9ztIT_4pDteeXdMQ8aQgB6uRXux6-V3b4OYECcN1fHg?e=K4svbv"}}{\fldrslt 
\f4\i\fs32 \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 STT411 Helicoptor Project(Sheet1).csv}}
\f2\fs32 \'a0
\f1\fs24 \
}